README.md, before:

# CrewPulse

CrewPulse is a private internal workforce intelligence system designed to support dispatch decisions with structured, data-backed insights.

## Product Principles

- **Private internal tool**: worker profiles are visible to staff only.
- **Role-based visibility**:
  - Workers do **not** see their profiles.
  - Customers can rate assignments.
  - Customers do **not** see worker profiles.
  - Staff can see all workforce analytics.
- **Operational focus**: clear scoring, trend visibility, and risk flagging.
- **Calm and structured UX**: concise, color-coded, and non-emotional.

## Core Questions CrewPulse Must Answer

CrewPulse must clearly identify:

- Workers who are consistently late.
- Workers who frequently no-call-no-show (NCNS).
- Category-specific strengths and weaknesses (for example, warehouse vs cleanup).
- Recent downward performance trends.
- Workers requiring review or termination recommendation.

## Application Experience

### 1) Main Dashboard

When staff logs in, CrewPulse displays:

#### Top-row metrics

- Workforce Average Score
- Active Workers Count
- Needs Review Count
- Terminate Flag Count

#### Priority panels

- 🔥 Top Performers (by category)
- ⚠️ Needs Review (decline/low category score)
- 🚨 NCNS Risk (pattern detection)
- ⏰ Chronic Late List

#### Status color coding

- Green = Strong
- Yellow = Needs Review
- Orange = High Risk
- Red = Terminate Recommended

### 2) Worker Profile Page (Core Screen)

#### Summary header

- Name
- Status badge
  - Active (Green)
  - Needs Review (Yellow)
  - Hold (Orange)
  - Terminate (Red)
- Overall Score (numeric; e.g. `4.2 / 5.0`)
- Tier Label
  - Elite (`4.5–5.0`)
  - Strong (`4.0–4.49`)
  - Solid (`3.5–3.99`)
  - At Risk (`3.0–3.49`)
  - Critical (`<3.0`)
- Total Jobs Worked
- Last 30-Day Score

#### Category breakdown

For each category (Warehouse, Cleanup, Janitorial, Events, etc.):

- Average rating
- Job count in category
- Trend arrow (`up`, `flat`, `down`)

Visibility rule:

- Category metrics display only after **3+ jobs** in that category.

### 3) Reliability Breakdown (Critical)

Each worker includes a reliability panel with:

- Total Jobs
- Completed
- Late
- Sent Home
- No-Call-No-Show (NCNS)

Calculated metrics:

- **Late Rate** = `late jobs / total jobs`
- **NCNS Rate** = `NCNS / total jobs`

This enables differentiated reliability assessment:

- High late rate + low NCNS = usually shows up but punctuality issues.
- Low late rate + high NCNS = high reliability risk.

## Scoring Model

### Performance and reliability are separate

CrewPulse surfaces:

- **Performance Score** (quality of work)
- **Reliability Score** (attendance consistency)

### Reliability impact weighting (example)

- Completed = neutral
- Late = `-0.3`
- Sent Home = `-0.7`
- NCNS = `-1.5`

NCNS is intentionally weighted more heavily than late arrivals.

### Ratings structure per assignment

Each assignment includes:

- **Staff Rating** (`1–5`)
  - Structured tags
  - Internal notes
- **Customer Rating** (`1–5`)
  - Optional dimensions: punctuality, work ethic, attitude, quality, safety
  - Would rehire? (`yes/no`)

Final score composition:

- Customer rating: **65%**
- Staff rating: **35%**
- Recent jobs carry greater weight.

## Automated Flags

### Needs Review triggers

- Overall score below `3.5`
- NCNS rate above `15%`
- `3+` incidents in 30 days
- Downward trend across 5 jobs

### Terminate Recommended triggers

- NCNS rate above `25%`
- `2` NCNS in last 5 jobs
- Overall score below `3.0` after `10+` jobs
- Severe incident flag

These flags are decision support only and do not auto-delete records.

## Search and Filtering

Search:

- Name
- ID
- Phone

Filters:

- Top warehouse workers
- High reliability
- Needs Review
- Terminate flagged
- Low cleanup rating
- NCNS risk

## MVP Delivery Plan

### Phase 1

- Login + roles
- Worker profiles
- Assignment logging
- Staff ratings
- Reliability tracking (late, NCNS, etc.)
- Numeric + tier scoring
- Worker profile dashboard
- Automatic Needs Review flag

### Phase 2

- Customer rating portal
- Weighted reliability scoring
- Terminate flag automation
- Dashboard alerts

### Phase 3

- Trend graphs
- Performance over time charts
- Export reports
- Smart dispatch suggestions


## Required GitHub Actions Variables

Set the following repository variable for the GitHub Pages deploy workflow:

- `VITE_API_BASE_URL`: Deployed API origin used at build time (for example `https://api.yourdomain.com`). Do **not** include a trailing slash.

Configure this in GitHub at: **Repo → Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions → Variables**.

## Local Development

Run the CrewPulse web app locally from the repository root:

```bash
npm install
npm run dev:web
```

Then open: `http://localhost:5173`

Workspace scripts available from repo root:

```bash
npm run dev
npm run build
npm run preview
```

## Database bootstrap

CrewPulse API now includes an initial Prisma schema + migration for workers, assignments, assignment events, ratings, category metrics, and automated flags.

From `apps/api`, run:

```bash
npm run db:migrate
npm run db:generate
npm run db:seed
```

The seed script creates:

- one high performer profile,
- one chronic late profile,
- one NCNS-risk profile.

These records are intended to validate dashboard and flag logic in development.

## CI/CD

CrewPulse uses GitHub Actions for continuous integration. The workflow is defined in `.github/workflows/ci.yml` and runs on every `push` and `pull_request`. The lint step is currently non-blocking while ESLint configuration is being finalized.

Initial CI pipeline steps:

1. Check out repository code.
2. Set up pinned Node.js version (`20.11.1`).
3. Install dependencies with lockfile (`npm ci`).
4. Run lint and typecheck/build.
5. Add test execution once a stable CI-safe root test command is configured.


## Deployment configuration (GitHub Pages)

The GitHub Pages workflow (`.github/workflows/deploy-pages.yml`) builds the web app with a production API origin passed as `VITE_API_BASE_URL`.

Required repository configuration:

1. Open **GitHub → Repository → Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions → Variables**.
2. Create a repository variable named **`VITE_API_BASE_URL`**.
3. Set it to your deployed API origin (example: `https://api.example.com`) with **no trailing slash**.

The deploy workflow validates this value (present, `http(s)` origin, and no trailing slash) and injects it into the build step:

- `VITE_API_BASE_URL: ${{ vars.VITE_API_BASE_URL }}`

Important behavior:

- Local development can still fall back to `http://localhost:4000` when `npm run dev:web` runs without `VITE_API_BASE_URL`.
- Production builds must define `VITE_API_BASE_URL`; otherwise the app intentionally throws an error to prevent shipping a `localhost` API target.

### GitHub branch protection setup

To protect `main`:

1. Go to **Settings → Branches → Add rule**.
2. Set branch name pattern to `main`.
3. Enable **Require status checks to pass before merging**.
4. Select the CI check from this workflow.
5. (Recommended) Enable **Require a pull request before merging** and **Require approvals**.

### Enable GitHub Actions (if disabled)

1. Open **Settings → Actions → General**.
2. Set actions permissions to **Allow all actions and reusable workflows** (or your approved org list).
3. Commit `.github/workflows/ci.yml` to the default branch.
4. Open a PR and verify the **Actions** tab shows CI runs for the branch/PR.

Commit message:

docs: clarify deployment API base URL fallback modes

README.md, after:

# CrewPulse

CrewPulse is a private internal workforce intelligence system designed to support dispatch decisions with structured, data-backed insights.

## Product Principles

- **Private internal tool**: worker profiles are visible to staff only.
- **Role-based visibility**:
  - Workers do **not** see their profiles.
  - Customers can rate assignments.
  - Customers do **not** see worker profiles.
  - Staff can see all workforce analytics.
- **Operational focus**: clear scoring, trend visibility, and risk flagging.
- **Calm and structured UX**: concise, color-coded, and non-emotional.

## Core Questions CrewPulse Must Answer

CrewPulse must clearly identify:

- Workers who are consistently late.
- Workers who frequently no-call-no-show (NCNS).
- Category-specific strengths and weaknesses (for example, warehouse vs cleanup).
- Recent downward performance trends.
- Workers requiring review or termination recommendation.

## Application Experience

### 1) Main Dashboard

When staff logs in, CrewPulse displays:

#### Top-row metrics

- Workforce Average Score
- Active Workers Count
- Needs Review Count
- Terminate Flag Count

#### Priority panels

- 🔥 Top Performers (by category)
- ⚠️ Needs Review (decline/low category score)
- 🚨 NCNS Risk (pattern detection)
- ⏰ Chronic Late List

#### Status color coding

- Green = Strong
- Yellow = Needs Review
- Orange = High Risk
- Red = Terminate Recommended

### 2) Worker Profile Page (Core Screen)

#### Summary header

- Name
- Status badge
  - Active (Green)
  - Needs Review (Yellow)
  - Hold (Orange)
  - Terminate (Red)
- Overall Score (numeric; e.g. `4.2 / 5.0`)
- Tier Label
  - Elite (`4.5–5.0`)
  - Strong (`4.0–4.49`)
  - Solid (`3.5–3.99`)
  - At Risk (`3.0–3.49`)
  - Critical (`<3.0`)
- Total Jobs Worked
- Last 30-Day Score

#### Category breakdown

For each category (Warehouse, Cleanup, Janitorial, Events, etc.):

- Average rating
- Job count in category
- Trend arrow (`up`, `flat`, `down`)

Visibility rule:

- Category metrics display only after **3+ jobs** in that category.

### 3) Reliability Breakdown (Critical)

Each worker includes a reliability panel with:

- Total Jobs
- Completed
- Late
- Sent Home
- No-Call-No-Show (NCNS)

Calculated metrics:

- **Late Rate** = `late jobs / total jobs`
- **NCNS Rate** = `NCNS / total jobs`

This enables differentiated reliability assessment:

- High late rate + low NCNS = usually shows up but punctuality issues.
- Low late rate + high NCNS = high reliability risk.

## Scoring Model

### Performance and reliability are separate

CrewPulse surfaces:

- **Performance Score** (quality of work)
- **Reliability Score** (attendance consistency)

### Reliability impact weighting (example)

- Completed = neutral
- Late = `-0.3`
- Sent Home = `-0.7`
- NCNS = `-1.5`

NCNS is intentionally weighted more heavily than late arrivals.

### Ratings structure per assignment

Each assignment includes:

- **Staff Rating** (`1–5`)
  - Structured tags
  - Internal notes
- **Customer Rating** (`1–5`)
  - Optional dimensions: punctuality, work ethic, attitude, quality, safety
  - Would rehire? (`yes/no`)

Final score composition:

- Customer rating: **65%**
- Staff rating: **35%**
- Recent jobs carry greater weight.

## Automated Flags

### Needs Review triggers

- Overall score below `3.5`
- NCNS rate above `15%`
- `3+` incidents in 30 days
- Downward trend across 5 jobs

### Terminate Recommended triggers

- NCNS rate above `25%`
- `2` NCNS in last 5 jobs
- Overall score below `3.0` after `10+` jobs
- Severe incident flag

These flags are decision support only and do not auto-delete records.

## Search and Filtering

Search:

- Name
- ID
- Phone

Filters:

- Top warehouse workers
- High reliability
- Needs Review
- Terminate flagged
- Low cleanup rating
- NCNS risk

## MVP Delivery Plan

### Phase 1

- Login + roles
- Worker profiles
- Assignment logging
- Staff ratings
- Reliability tracking (late, NCNS, etc.)
- Numeric + tier scoring
- Worker profile dashboard
- Automatic Needs Review flag

### Phase 2

- Customer rating portal
- Weighted reliability scoring
- Terminate flag automation
- Dashboard alerts

### Phase 3

- Trend graphs
- Performance over time charts
- Export reports
- Smart dispatch suggestions


## Required GitHub Actions Variables

Set the following repository variable for the GitHub Pages deploy workflow:

- `VITE_API_BASE_URL`: Deployed API origin used at build time (for example `https://api.yourdomain.com`). Do **not** include a trailing slash.

Configure this in GitHub at: **Repo → Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions → Variables**.

## Local Development

Run the CrewPulse web app locally from the repository root:

```bash
npm install
npm run dev:web
```

Then open: `http://localhost:5173`

Workspace scripts available from repo root:

```bash
npm run dev
npm run build
npm run preview
```

## Database bootstrap

CrewPulse API now includes an initial Prisma schema + migration for workers, assignments, assignment events, ratings, category metrics, and automated flags.

From `apps/api`, run:

```bash
npm run db:migrate
npm run db:generate
npm run db:seed
```

The seed script creates:

- one high performer profile,
- one chronic late profile,
- one NCNS-risk profile.

These records are intended to validate dashboard and flag logic in development.

## CI/CD

CrewPulse uses GitHub Actions for continuous integration. The workflow is defined in `.github/workflows/ci.yml` and runs on every `push` and `pull_request`. The lint step is currently non-blocking while ESLint configuration is being finalized.

Initial CI pipeline steps:

1. Check out repository code.
2. Set up pinned Node.js version (`20.11.1`).
3. Install dependencies with lockfile (`npm ci`).
4. Run lint and typecheck/build.
5. Add test execution once a stable CI-safe root test command is configured.


## Deployment configuration (GitHub Pages)

The GitHub Pages workflow (`.github/workflows/deploy-pages.yml`) supports two API base URL modes.

### `VITE_API_BASE_URL` is optional if using same-origin fallback

If `VITE_API_BASE_URL` is provided, the workflow validates it (`http(s)` origin with no trailing slash) and injects it into the build.

If `VITE_API_BASE_URL` is omitted:

- In local development (`npm run dev:web`), the app defaults to `http://localhost:4000`.
- In production builds, the app falls back to `window.location.origin` (same-origin API routing) and logs a warning in the browser console.

### When you should still set `VITE_API_BASE_URL`

Set `VITE_API_BASE_URL` when your API is on a different origin than the deployed web app (for example, web on GitHub Pages and API on another domain).

You can omit it only when your deployment routes API requests from the same origin as the web app.

### Mode A: explicit API origin via `VITE_API_BASE_URL`

1. Open **GitHub → Repository → Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions → Variables**.
2. Create a repository variable named **`VITE_API_BASE_URL`**.
3. Set it to your deployed API origin (example: `https://api.example.com`) with **no trailing slash**.

Build env example:

```yaml
env:
  VITE_API_BASE_URL: ${{ vars.VITE_API_BASE_URL }}
```

### Mode B: no variable + same-origin API routing

- Do not define `VITE_API_BASE_URL` in repository variables.
- Ensure your production host serves/routes API endpoints from the same origin as the web app, so requests resolve against `window.location.origin`.

Example: if the web app loads from `https://ops.example.com`, API calls target `https://ops.example.com/<api-path>`.

### GitHub branch protection setup

To protect `main`:

1. Go to **Settings → Branches → Add rule**.
2. Set branch name pattern to `main`.
3. Enable **Require status checks to pass before merging**.
4. Select the CI check from this workflow.
5. (Recommended) Enable **Require a pull request before merging** and **Require approvals**.

### Enable GitHub Actions (if disabled)

1. Open **Settings → Actions → General**.
2. Set actions permissions to **Allow all actions and reusable workflows** (or your approved org list).
3. Commit `.github/workflows/ci.yml` to the default branch.
4. Open a PR and verify the **Actions** tab shows CI runs for the branch/PR.
